# IO in Haskell

A pure function is such that the output value depends solely on the input value and not some other external condition.
No matter how many times you do so, or at what point, if you call function f on input v then you should always get the same output.

Not true in Java, obviously. How do we allow for side-effects in a pure language?

An IO based function is a function that transforms a representation of the system state. e.g. write characters to file, read in characters from stdin.

Suppose we have type World that represents the state. We can define a type with a return value.

``` haskell
type IO a = World -> (a, World)
```

Haskell expressions of type IO a are called actions.
The three basic actions are Char based actions that use stdin/stdout.

1. Read a single character from stin (getChar :: IO Char)
2. Take a Char and return an action that writes Char to stdout (putChar :: Char -> IO ())
3. Take a pure expression with no IO and casts it to an expression with IO (return :: a -> IO a)

We use do notation in Haskell. We list actions and allow any result of the action to be pattern matched and bound to a variable. The final action must not be bound and is a return e action.

For example, lets write a simple example where we create an IO action that reads three characters from std and returns the first and third.

```haskell
firstThird :: IO (Char, Char)
firstThird = do x <- getChar
                getChar
                y <- getChar
                return (x, y)
```

